Guide for F2P Regs v1.0.0 
DRAFT - IN PROGRESS
By Irish Woof


This guide will cover methods best for training (and maxing) a regular F2P account. Many of the methods are credit to Pawz. If you are a F2P ironman or ultimate ironman, this guide is not for you - please instead check out Asura Zoma's excetionally written guide.

Table of Contents
1. BASICS
  1.1 Introduction
  1.2 Clarifications
  1.3 Alts
  1.4 Starting Off/Questing
2. COMBAT SKILLS
  2.1 Melee
  2.2 Range
  2.3 Magic
  2.4 Prayer
3. NON-COMBAT SKILLS
  3.1 Cooking
  3.2 Firemaking
  3.3 Fishing
  3.4 Woodcutting
  3.5 Crafting
  3.6 Mining
  3.7 Smithing
  3.8 Runecrafting
4. MONEY MAKING
  4.1 Abstract
  4.2 P2P Alts
  4.3 F2P Alts
  4.4 Other Options


1. BASICS

1.1 Introduction

So you want to play as a F2P reg? Well congrats, you chose a pretty awesome account type. Being F2P has its upsides and downsides. The overall gameplay and best methods will rarely change. Content updates for F2P are rare and for those who choose to play pure F2P this is considered a plus. There's something truly iconic and nostalgic about the F2P gameplay. However, if you get bored of content easily or want content updates, maybe you should reconsider being pure F2P. It's not for everyone and you should recognize that before you get going. Also, please note: if you plan on going P2P, do not waste your time in F2P! Everything is more efficient in P2P and there is no point in getting "base stats" before going P2P! For the hours you will spend getting those base stats in F2P, you can quest them in a fraction of the time in P2P. If you have no intention of becoming P2P and would like to partake in the best account type around, continue reading.


1.2 Clarifications

Get this straight now: you are going to need money and lots of it. Oftentimes, the most efficient method is going to cost a bit more than other popular methods. Current EHP rates assume "zero time money", meaning it is assumed that money is not an issue for you. Many of the efficient methods I'm going to talk about also involve tick-manipulation. Tick-manipulation takes advantage of the Runescape engine in which a "tick" is 0.6 seconds. The goal of tick-manipulation is to bypass the tick requirement for receiving experience in certain skills. The best way to understand tick-manipulation is by watching a video or two and PRACTICING. A written guide can only do so much for you so I will not be going into depth about these methods. I will focus on the most efficient methods, but I will also talk briefly about others. In the end, you should choose the methods best for your long-term efficiency. This might mean using less inefficient methods in order to prevent burnout. Remember than Runescape is just a game. 


1.3 Alts 

Most of the absolute most efficient methods require the use of alternate accounts or "alts". The best money making methods are in P2P and the need for a lot of money means that using P2P alts to generate needed cash will take much less time. While EHP now assumes no use of alts, certain skills (melee, runecrafting) will have significantly faster experience methods with the use of alts. It's fine if you choose not to use alts, but know that there are faster methods out there. 


1.4 Starting Off/Questing

I won't say too much on questing - F2P questing is fairly straightforward and there are a number of solid guides out there. You can do most, if not all, F2P quests in a single day. If you are trying to be as efficient as possible, I suggest leveraging quest experience rewards as much as possible. I would also suggest getting 37 magic for all teleports before doing too many quests; teleports will save you a great deal of time. If you can afford them, energy pots will also make questing much faster. One efficient way of starting out is to avoid melee training and instead focus on magic until the completion of Dragon Slayer.  



2. COMBAT SKILLS

2.1 Melee
	
Much of your time will go towards training melee stats. Prepare to spend a lot of time (1000+ hours) on melee. 

The fastest possible experience (at all levels) will always be achieved through the use of Clan Wars alts. This requires 2 or more alts each with 1 (or very low) defence and 50+ hitpoints. You can use prayer/strength potions to get fast experience, exiting the portal when you're out of prayer (prayer flicking is even more efficient). Use food on your alts, banking with one while attacking the other. A good choice for food is wines as they are exceptionally cheap and the stat decrease doesn't matter. While this method was at one time the EHP rate (~68k/hr at high levels), that is no longer the case.

If you do not want to use alts:

Starting out it's best just to find a place that is NOT densely populated. If you've completed Vampire Slayer/Dragon Slayer, you should have decent melee stats already. If not, goblins and cows are both decent. A hidden gem is Goblin Village.

After getting 20 base melees I suggest a number of places:
	- level 28 flesh crawlers 
	- level 12 minotaurs (not AFK-able)
	- level 18/24 zombies (wilderness)
	- level 9 Al Karid Warriors (not AFK-able)

	Do NOT waste your time at crowded places like Hill Giants. Remember that your goal is not to make money while training melee, it's to gain exerpeience as fast as possible. This often means taking a GP loss.

For 30-40 melees, some good options are:
	- level 35 flesh crawlers
	- level 18/24 zombies (wilderness)

After base 40 melees, I highly recommend you go to level 41 flesh crawlers, although you can remain at one of the previous places. Level 41 flesh crawlers (south room) will be the best place to train for a long time now. The north room is also great after you raise your defence levels some (50+). If you are in the south fleshies room, you can make them aggressive again by either run all the way to the edge of the southwestern-most room or by first running to the southern doors then running to the northern doors.

After base ~70 melees, level 50 giant spiders become a viable option. These can often give slightly faster experience than flesh crawlers at the price of more food used. The current EHP rates are set to training at giant spiders with strength potions while prayer flicking. At high levels this will be the fastest non-alt experience possible (~45k/hr).
 
NOTE: You can start using strength potions whenever you want, I suggest after 50 strength. A good food choice is apple pies as they heal 14 hp each and will often turn a profit (by selling the empty pie dishes). An efficient banking method is using the mini-game teleport to teleport to Castle Wars and then using the Skull Sceptre to teleport back to the Stronghold of Security. Lastly: power amulet > strength amulet.

For 1 defence pures, you should stay at level 35 flesh crawlers indefinitely. For 40 defence pures, level 41 flesh crawlers are the best - specifically in the southern room as the zombies in that room are a lower level and your food will last longer.


2.2 Range

Just like melee, range will take a great deal of time. Also like melee, the fastest possible experience is gained through the use of clan wars alts (using adamant arrows). Clan wars collects your arrows for you and returns them when you exit the portal.If you can do the clan wars method (even if it's just with one alt) that is HIGHLY recommended for starting off. The experience you gain will be much faster than experience gained with any other method.

Otherwise, possible starting places are chickens, seagulls (Port Sarim or Corsair Cove), cows, or goblins. Once again, you'll do best to find a place where you are not competing heavily with others.

At level 20 range, I suggest going to level 12 minotaurs. Use the room just south of the entrance that has a barrier, allowing you to refrain from bringing food. Minotaurs drop iron arrows, meaning after a certain range level (when your DPS is high enough), you will no longer need to buy arrows. This method is going to be significantly slower than using clan wars alts.

At level 30 range, I suggest going to level 28 minotaurs (using the room with another barrier). Same drill as level 12 minotaurs, just higher HP. This is as good a place as any to get 40 range. Other options are:
	- level 35 flesh crawlers
	- level 18/24 zombies
	- level 9 Al Karid Warriors

Note however that these options will all require either a decent defence level or a decent amount of food.

At level 40 range you have more options:
	- level 42 moss giants (best on Crandor)
	- level 35 flesh crawlers
	- level 41 flesh crawlers
	- level 53 ice giants

The benefit to level 41 flesh crawlers compared to level 35 flesh crawlers is they are less crowded while still being AFK-able. You will need more food. If you choose to do so, you can train indefinitely at level 41 flesh crawlers. This is a easy AFK method that will not use up your food too much. 

At level 70 range and 80 defence you can choose to train at level 50 giant spiders. This will be semi-AFK. The official EHP rate is set at giant spiders WITH prayer flicking. A high defence is required unless you choose to flick protect from melee. The downside to this compared to level 41 flesh crawlers is either (a) the need for more food or (b) the attention required to prayer flick.

Other high level options (using safe spots):
	- level 81 lesser demons
	- level 82 ogress warriors

These options are generally brought up due to the potential money-making abilities of each. While they are not bad experience, they are not the best. Particularly if you are going to train at ogresses, you absolutely must used adamant arrows. Even then, you would do better to spend your time elsewhere. A slightly more demanding method at ogresses is to have a splash alt "reserve" one ogress for you while you kill the other. This will help get rid of any competition from other players while also increasing your experience per hour.

2.3 Magic

In general, as much magic as possible should be trained zero-time. The EHP rates assume that you will train magic with zero-time methods. You can quest 9 magic and from there, getting 21 magic is not difficult. Then you should do zero-time magic training via low-alchs and eventually high-alchs. If you decide to wait to alch until 55 magic, the fastest experience will either be curse splashing (cost-efficient) or falador teleports (expensive).

Some good ativities to alch during are: 
	- melee/range training (in-between hits, lose no DPS)
	- during smithing trips (running back to bank)
	- fishing
If you only alch after 55 magic, it will take ~198K alchs to reach 99. There are a lot of alch/profit calculators available, make use of them. Rune items often alch for a profit.

Curse splashing can be a cheap and fast method to train magic, particularly when combined with alching. If you're looking to gain the fastest possible xp/hr, curse alching is the best method. Note that there is little place for training using combat spells (strike/bolt/blast). They are a fine alternative to get to 55 magic, but shouldn't be used afterwards.

You can also use superheat while power mining and drop the bars. Pawz has a good guide on this and can explain it better than I can.

SPLASHING: If you are trying to train efficiently, splashing is absolutely not the way to go. At about 14k/hr, splashing is inefficient, although AFK and cheap. It's a fine way to train if you plan on working on another account simultaneously. Remember you need green vambraces in addition to full armour to get the necessary negative magic bonus.

Staying sane while training magic: it's easy to get overwhelmed by the idea of training magic only through zero-time alching. Most of us are not robots and find the concentration required for these methods to be too much at times. Again, find what methods work for you. Most people will just only alch while bankstanding - and that's fine. Just understand that EHP rates assume zero-time magic experience.


2.4 Prayer

Prayer will be one of your largest money sinks. It's inefficient to bury bones from combat, but rather always buy your bones. You should absolutely always buy and bury big bones. Keep noted big bones in your inventory and use them on a banker to unnote for max efficiency. The EHP rate assumes you use the noted bones method (~43k/hr)

You will need ~869K big bones for 99 prayer. This will cost 195.5M at 225 gp/big bones and 217.3M at 250 gp/big bones.



3. NON-COMBAT SKILLS

3.1 Cooking

By far the quickest and easiest skill to train, cooking is good 99 to start off with. For max efficiency, you should cook the best possible food until you can make wines at level 35. 
    Level 1-5: sardines
    Level 5-15: herring
    Level 15-25: trout
    Level 25-35: salmon

You should then do wines until 99. At level 68 you will have a 100% success rate with wines. This EHP rate is set with wines (480k/hr). From level 68 you will need ~62.2k wines for 99. 

Cooking other foods is not a terrible option and experience can still be quite fast with little to no gp-loss. However, the most efficient method is with wines. If you're cooking rather than making wines, you should light your own fires and bank at the G.E. 
    
Non-burn (small gp loss) methods:
    Level 15-55: trout
    Level 55-64: salmon
    Level 64-74: tuna
    Level 74-86: lobster
    Level 86-99: swordfish


3.2 Firemaking

Firemaking is another fast skill to train. You should burn the best logs possible. The best way to train firemaking is at the G.E. using Pawz's method. Once again, a video of this is much better than me trying to explain it in writing. This is a very click-intensive method and good experience rates can be obtained without it. You should keep your logs noted in your inventory. 

The most efficient way to train is with the best possible logs (and EHP assumes using the best possible logs). However, most people will train with maple logs due to their extremely low price. At 7 gp each, you can get 99 firemaking for under 700k gp (logs are 135 xp each). It will take you a little under 100 hours this way.


3.3 Fishing

Get level 20 fishing through net/bait fishing. Bait fish as soon as possible.

After this you should fly fish until 99 fishing. The Lumbridge fishing spots are technically better as their spawn points are closer together, although most people fish at Barbarian Village. The fastest experience is gained through 3-tick fishing (best done using snow through either a reindeer hat or a snow globe). This is another method best seen through video, but it's not exceptionally hard to pick up. You should click the fishing spot, then your pile of snow, and then the fishing spot again.

You can also AFK fly fish for decent xp/hr. However, you should ALWAYS drop your fish. To do otherwise is inefficient. You should not cook them at Barbarian Village. Cooking experience can be gained much faster in other ways.


3.4 Woodcutting

Always use the best axe possible.

Levels 1-15 are done with normal trees. Good spots for this are behind Lumbridge Castle and by the Grand Exchange.
Levels 15-30 are done with oak trees. It will be faster experience to drop your logs rather than bank them. Trees near banks will generally be flooded by bots, so avoid those.

Note: it can be beneficial to wait until 41 woodcutting (and a rune axe) to start cutting willow trees.

Levels 30-99 should be done with willow trees. Do not waste your time with maples or yews, both are slower experience and therefore inefficient. The best spots for willow trees are Rimmington and northwest of the Crafting Guild. You should never bank your logs. Willows provide almost no profit and spots near banks are often crowded. If you do not want to bank your logs, instead selling them to a general store is an alternative (much slower) option.

For max efficiency, you should 3-tick willow trees. There are a number of video guides available that explain this very well. 

3.5 Crafting

Crafting done efficiently is very expensive.
Efficient method:
    Levels 1-20: create best possible leather item
    Levels 20-27: cut sapphires
    Levels 27-34: cut emeralds
    Levels 34-43: cut rubies
    Levels 43-99: cut diamonds

Cutting diamonds you can reach ~290k xp/hr.

Cost to 99:
    Diamonds from 43: ~121K diamonds @ 1.2K loss per diamond = 145.2M
    Rubies from 43: ~153K rubies @ 500 gp loss per ruby = 76.5M
    Emeralds from 27: ~193K emeralds @ 300 gp loss per emerald = 57.9M
    Sapphires from 20: ~261K sapphires @ 200 gp loss per sapphire = 52.2M

The EHP rate assumes that the player cutting the best possible gem. However, there are crafting methods that are much less costly, sometimes even turning a profit.

Cost efficient:
    Levels 1-5: leather items
    Levels 5-8: gold rings/necklaces
    Levels 8-on: gold amulets, etc.

Gold amulets will always turn a solid profit and get ~30k xp/hr. Other various jewelrey can be made for a profit, but other jewelry is less consistent. It would be good to check often which jewelry makes a profit at the time. At level 70, diamond amulets will almost always make a profit and profide significantly better xp/hr than gold amulets. 


3.6 Smithing

You should always start smithing by doing the Knight's Sword quest, getting you from 1-29 smithing.

If you're looking to train smithing in the most efficient way possible, you should superheat your iron while mining it, doing this all the way to 99 mining. From there you should make the best platebody possible. Always smith at Varrock West.

If you decide not to superheat, you should go ahead and still make the best platebody possible. This will get expensive.

    Levels 29-33: bronze platebodies
    Levels 33-48: iron platebodies
    Levels 48-68: steel platebodies
    Levels 68-88: mithril platebodies
    Levels 88-98: adamant platebodies

    Making adamant platebodies will get you ~200k xp/hr.

At level 98 you can choose to use Dwarven Stout to increase your smithing level and make rune 2H's, rune plateskirts, or rune platelegs. These items generally make a decent profit and are very fast xp/hr. 

Especially when smithing platebodies, it is very efficient to alch the platebodies you just made when running from the anvil to the bank.

Steel nails (possible to make at level 34) can be a cost-saving alternative to making platebodies. While the method will cost much less, the xp/hr is only ~35k/hr.


3.7 Mining

You can get some quick mining levels by completing Doric's Quest (takes under a minute with the materials).

At level 15 you should start mining iron and keep mining iron to level 99. Iron will always provide the fastest experience possible and you should drop your ores for the fastest experience.

Places to mine iron:
    - Al Kharid mine
    - Rimmington mine
    - Hobgoblin mine (recommended)
    - Mining guild (level 60 required)

If you don't like clicking as much and do not want to have to drop full inventories of ore, mining at the four iron rock spot in the mining guild and then selling to the nearby shop is a feasible alternative. This method is slightly lower xp/hr, but less click-intensive.


3.8 Runecrafting

Runecrafting is a slow and painful skill in F2P. It can also become quite costly.

There is no level requirement for making tiaras, so you should begin making them immediately. The current EHP rate is set making earth tiaras while using energy potions for 26k xp/hr. Higher xp/hr can be gained through the use of alts, each with a varrock teleport (~40k xp/hr with 3 teleport alts).

Another option is to make body tiaras. This is even more expensive and in order to make use of a teleport you must have a large supply of skull sceptre pieces. If you have trained combat levels at flesh crawlers this should not be too much of an issue.

Making fire tiaras is extremely expensive and not recommended.

Tiaras generally cost ~50 gp each, so that is added to the cost of each talisman.

Cost to 99:
    Earth tiaras: ~401K tiaras @ 250 ea = 100.25M
    Body tiaras: ~348K tiaras @ 500 ea = 174M

Using ~1 energy potion per inventory for each method (likely to actually be higher), you will need ~25K energy potions. At 500 gp per energy potion, this is another 12.5M, which while costly, is a drop in the bucket when compared with the overall cost and the time saved.


4. MONEY MAKING

4.1 Abstract

There are a ton of money making guides out there. It is generally recommended that if you plan on maxing as a F2P reg that you make money on P2P alts. Whether or not you think that this is "breaking" pure-F2P, know that the top players use P2P alts and it is difficult, if not impossible, to keep up without them. If you do not want to use P2P alts, your next best alternative is to use F2P merching alts. Having these extra accounts allows you to put in for significantly more offers than you can on a single account. Again, find what's best for you. It isn't a one-size-fits-all model.

4.2 P2P Alts

This isn't a money making guide for P2P, so I won't go into much detail here. Runecrafting is a pain, but a great way to make money. Runecrafting nature runes will be one of your best ways to make money via an alt. There are a number of things you can also do to make consistent money every day that take little to no effort. Buying battlestaves is one way. Another is to build up your Nightmare Zone points and then buy 15 herb boxes each day. P2P also has 8 G.E. slots rather than 3, making merching quite a bit easier.

4.3 F2P Alts

There aren't too many easy ways to make money in F2P. However, once you have a decent amount of cash built up it's easy to merch on F2P alts, only having to check the account once a day (maybe twice if you're merching something volatile). F2P accounts are easy to maintain, so it's feasible to have a large number of accounts to merch on (5-10 or even more). This will allow you to buy more of one thing at a time as most items have a very reachable buy limit. If you're looking to AFK a task while making money, yews are an option, but a bad one. Crafting can be a good AFK option. While it varies, things like gold amulets will almost always make a profit. 

4.4 Other Options

This shouldn't have to be said, but you should always be merching something on your account. Money sitting in the bank is wasted money. There aren't many fast ways to make cash in F2P, so you need to be smart with what you have. If you can reach level 99 smithing (98 if you use Dwarven Stout), making various rune items such as plateskirts, platelegs, and 2H's will make a profit. This will be some of the quickest possible money making in F2P. If you can do this on a F2P alt that's even better. 
